# Atomics ☢ and memory ordering

Taming multiple threads is a mess. Not only many things can happen all at once,
but what you wrote in the code isn't exactly what happens in the CPU. To gain
some more performance, the compiler cheats if it thinks nobody is watching. It
can reorder instructions or throw some of them out if they look useless. The
same happens in the hardware. Furthermore, there isn't just one RAM, but each
memory location can live in different caches at each time and some of them are
private to each CPU. It would not make do to publish all the local changes to
one's cache right away.

This, if not handled with care (eg. synchronized) leads to the dreaded
[undefined behavior].

Besides the classical synchronization primitives (mutexes, barriers, …), some
languages offer atomic types
([C++](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/atomic/atomic) and
[Rust](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/atomic/) amongst others).
They are cool, because they allow implementing the classical primitives and some
really fast multithreaded data structures (like the ones in [`crossbeam`]).
Unfortunately, they are much harder to use than just placing something behind a
mutex, partly because many of their methods have this magical [`Ordering`]
parameter which influences with what and how they are synchronized.

Most documentation explains it in terms of guarantees, causalities and happens-before.
These are good for a formal specification, but in practice it feels like
teaching a set theory to an accountant ‒ not really what is needed in practice.
The closest explanation to an easy to grasp one I could find is in the
[nomicon], but I decided to try and give it a go myself. This'll be more
intuitive, I just hope it is not at the cost of correctness.

[undefined behavior]: /undefined.md
[`crossbeam`]: https://crates.io/crates/crossbeam
[`Ordering`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/atomic/enum.Ordering.html
[nomicon]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/atomics.html

## What is an atomic anyway?

Atomic types don't differentiate themselves by the memory they live in ‒ it's ordinary
RAM as with any other type. They don't take more or less memory than the
non-atomic variant, their bit representations are identical. Only, the compiler
generates different instructions to handle them (and avoids some optimisations),
which forces the processor to do things without cheating. In theory one could
use the same variable sometimes atomically and sometimes not, but it would make
little sense in practice.

However, because both the compiler and the processor want to cheat (and you want
them to cheat, to get a faster program), the ordering parameter says how much
cheating is allowed with each operation. This is one of the reasons atomics are
usually faster than placing mutexes everywhere ‒ they control the cheating in
much finer detail (the other reason is the mutex enters kernel space to suspend
the thread if it needs to wait for another thread to unlock it, which is
expensive).

Some guides recommend to use the *Sequentially Consistent* ordering if you are
not sure. I don't think this is really a good advice ‒ not because of its
effect on performance. If you don't know *which* ordering you can afford to
use, you also don't know if using atomics is enough or if you have to
go with a mutex or some other stronger thing. Mutex is the safe one and when you
managed to prove an atomic is enough, you probably already know which ordering
you need to use with it.

Important part of understanding the orders is that they don't define how the atomic
itself acts. They influence only the synchronization of *other* memory locations
‒ how much other synchronization piggy-backs on that operation. Obviously, less
is faster.

## Relaxed order ‒ sanity just for me

All atomics are sane in the sense that accessing them from multiple threads at
once will not produce undefined behaviour and that the atomic itself will act as
you'd expect ‒ if you start at 0, increment it 10 times by 1, you get numbers
from 0 to 10, each one exactly once and the value at the end will be 10. A later
increment in the same thread will result in a larger number. The threads will
see the operations of one atomic in a single common timeline (eg. if the atomic
reaches 10 and my thread saw it, it will not go back to 5 later on unless
someone decreases it again).

```rust
let a = Arc::new(AtomicUsize::new(0));
let mut threads = Vec::new();
for _ in 0..5 {
	threads.push(thread::spawn(|| {
		let first = a.fetch_add(1, Ordering::Relaxed);
		let second = a.fetch_add(1, Ordering::Relaxed);
		assert!(first < second);
	}));
}
for t in threads {
	t.join().unwrap();
}
assert_eq!(10, a.load(Ordering::Relaxed));
```

Apart from this, the relaxed order doesn't promise anything else. Not even order
of operations in relation with other atomics (eg. when incrementing atomic `A`
and `B`, it can happen that one thread sees them incremented in this order while
another thread in the reverse order). Yes, different threads may see them in
different orders (don't worry about it too much if it feels a bit
schizophrenic). You can get some pretty weird behaviors, but only with multiple
variables (atomic or not) in play.

What good is it?

* If you need to generate unique IDs (at least until you run out of distinct
  numbers and wrap around).
* If you need some information (eg. „please stop“) to reach another thread.
* If you count something and need the exact number at the end of the program.
* For performance metrics, because you don't care about little inconsistencies
  in their relative counts (you can get few more answers than requests at the
  time you read them, because the answer atomic was faster in sending its
  updates to the reader thread).

Not all architectures know this order. If they don't, they fall back to
something stronger.

## Release & Acquire ‒ sending data from one thread to another

In addition to what the relaxed order provides, this one makes a contract
between two threads. If one of them does a release operation on an atomic and
another one then does an acquire operation on the *same* atomic, all the data
the first thread has written before the release becomes visible on the second
thread after the acquire. The pair of operations is a rendezvous point to hand
over memory.

What good is it?

* Writing a mutex, spinlock, channel or some other interesting data structure ‒
  the pair of operations ensure that the original thread „publishes“ all its
  changes from the cache to RAM and the other one „downloads“ all the relevant
  memory (this is a simplification of what actually happens, there's something
  called [cache coherence] in play so it doesn't have to go all the way to RAM,
  but it's a good enough mental model).
* It allows creating bi-directional synchronization (a mutex first acquires the
  lock in form of an atomic acquire, gets the current memory and then
  releases it, publishing its changes) or one-directional (a writer end of a
  channel could get away with just release operations, while the reader would be
  enough with acquire ones to get what the writer published, saving the
  bandwidth by not sending changes the other way around).

```rust
let spinlock = AtomicBool::new(false); // not locked
...
while spinlock.compare_and_swap(false, true, Ordering::Acquire) {}
// It's locked here
spinlock.store(false, Ordering::Release);
```

Few important things of note:

* There's no synchronization with any *other* thread guaranteed.
* There's no guarantee about the memory the first thread changes *after* the
  release operation.
* No relation is enforced if the operations happen on *different* atomics.
* To correctly synchronize some other memory, the first thread must have finished
  writing into the memory by the time it does the release operation. It
  „releases“ its ownership of the memory.
* It works only if the release operation is writing (store) and the acquire
  operation is reading the atomic (load). Using them in reverse is illegal.

There's also [`AcqRel`] ordering, which is a hybrid one. It acts like both
acquire and release with an operation that is load-store (like `fetch_add`),
allowing more complex patterns like exchanging of memory on a [`Barrier`]. It is
illegal on load-only or store-only operations.

[cache coherence]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cache_coherence
[`AcqRel`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/atomic/enum.Ordering.html#variant.AcqRel
[`Barrier`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/sync/struct.Barrier.html

## Sequentially consistent

This is just like `AcqRel` (or `Acquire` on load and `Release` on store), but in
addition to that, it also synchronizes the order of operations with *other*
atomics, or more correctly, with all `SeqCst` operations across the whole
program. All threads have a single „timeline“ of all the `SeqCst` operations on
all the atomics. It is still possible for the weaker operations to move around
as they wish (well, unless they happen on an atomic that also did a `SeqCst`
operation ‒ such a weaker operation must stay on the same side of that `SeqCst`
operation, because it is on the same atomic, but it still can move around
`SeqCst`s of different atomics).

What good is it? Honestly, I haven't found a use case that couldn't be solved by
something weaker yet. I'd be glad if you can provide one.

## Other synchronization points

Just like a pair of `AcqRel` operations on the same atomic is a place for two
threads to meet and exchange their news about what happened in the global RAM,
there are other such events. There's likely some atomic operation hidden inside
them, so in that sense it could everything be just this, but on the outside,
these must also enforce the propagation of news for the thread/memory model to
make any kind of sense:

* Locking/unlocking a mutex, meeting at a barrier.
* Sending data through a channel.
* Spawning or joining another thread.

## Summary

* Relaxed: Just relax and don't worry about details like the order of things or
  other memory.
* Release: Make a press release about what changes you made to the memory.
* Acquire: Get hold of all the news.
* SeqCst: Make sure everyone involved is consistent about what happened when
  during crossexamination.
