# Personal collection of Rust hacks

Rust is a great language. However, I have the (probably bad) habit of using
everything I get my hands on to the very limits. That's like ideal gas ‒ it
expands until it hits some walls. Not that I would try on purpose, it just
somehow happens. There's no surprise I've hit things that looked impossible or
weren't ready yet even in Rust… but in many cases I've beaten the problem long
enough until it gave up and I came up with an ugly hack to work around it.

I've decided to share the ones I can remember from top of my head in case
someone gets to a similar situation. None of them requires enabling any nightly
features, but in one case the current stable compiler is unable to crunch
through it yet (beta is, it's probably some bug that got fixed).

Also note I'm typing this without compiling the examples, so you may need to fix
typos or add some type hints ‒ but the idea itself should hold.

## Poor Man's try block

While I haven't paid the attention to the discussion about final syntax, a try
block is being planned. That'll allow limiting an early return by a question
mark to the scope of block instead of a whole function, *something like* this:

```rust
fn load_cache(path: impl AsRef<Path>) -> Result<Cache, Box<Error + Send + Sync>> {
    let data = try {
        // Question marks here exit only the try block, not the function
        let mut f = File::open(path)?;
        let mut bytes = Vec::new();
        f.read_to_end(&mut bytes)?;
        bytes
    };
    let cache = match data {
        // But this question mark exits the function
        Ok(data) => Cache::from_data(data)?;
        Err(_) => {
            warn!("Couldn't read cache, using an empty one instead");
            Cache::default()
        }
    };
    Ok(cache)
}
```

The `try` block is matter of convenience. It doesn't bring anything new couldn't
do without it, but grouping some error sites together and handling them in a
bunch is handy and doing it with `.and_then` or other similar methods often
feels awkward.

But the `try` block is not there yet. So, let's roll our own:

```rust
macro_rules! pmtb {
    ($($body: tt)*) => {
        (|| -> Result<_, Box<Error + Send + Sync>> {
            Ok({
                $($body)*
            })
        })()
    }
}

fn load_cache(path: impl AsRef<Path>) -> Result<Cache, Box<Error + Send + Sync>> {
    let data = pmtb! {
        // Question marks here exit only the try block, not the function
        let mut f = File::open(path)?;
        let mut bytes = Vec::new();
        f.read_to_end(&mut bytes)?;
        bytes
    };
    unimplemented!("The rest of the stuff...");
}
```

What does that do? The basic idea is, create a closure (that will work as the
barrier for `?` and whatever `return` happens to be inside) and execute it right
away. This is AFAIK different from the proposed `try` block in that it doesn't
work for all `Try` types, only for results (that is left as an exercise for the
reader O:-)) and `return` in the real `try` blocks would exit the outer
function, not only the block (that probably can't be made to work, but who cares
about that?).

This variant is with „OK wrapping“, one without would be trivial to construct
too.

By the way, I've been told this is used in javascript and actually has a name ‒
but I forgot the name.

## Poor Man's `FnBox`

We have the nice `Box<Fn()>` and `Box<FnMut()>`. You can create a
`Box<FnOnce()>` too, but there's no way to call it (yet), because the call
consumes the `FnOnce`. For that, Rust needs to place it to the top of the stack
and for that it needs to know how large it is ‒ which is precisely the thing we
don't want to care about when boxing trait objects. This is not problem with
only `FnOnce`, but any method that consumes `self` and similar technique would
work too.

The standard library has a workaround called `FnBox`, but it is unstable.
Eventually, `Box<FnOnce()>` will start working (out of the box?). Until then,
let's do it this way:

```rust
fn set_cback<F: FnOnce()>(&mut self, f: F) {
    let mut f = Some(f);
    // self.cback is Box<FnMut()>
    self.cback = Box::new(move || {
        (f.take().expect("FnOnce called more than once!"))()
    });
}
```

The trick here is, we wrap the `FnOnce` into a new `FnMut`. As we create a new
`FnMut` one for each `F` that is passed to us, this `FnMut` *does* know the
proper size and can call the `FnOnce`. And boxing `FnMut` works. Needless to
say, if you try to call it more than once, this `FnMut` will panic.

If you worry about the panic, you can wrap this into a type that hides these
details ‒ holds the `Box<FnMut>` inside itself privately and the `.call` method
consumes the type, re-introducing the compile-time check back. But it's a bit
sad this type can't be called directly with `()`.

## Anonymous Associated Types

In Rust, some types are so very evil and we can't even type their name. There
are some places that let you talk about such types, as generic parameters or
`impl Trait`. But other places don't ‒ specifically, associated types in
traits. There's this `existential type` thing coming… but it's not here yet.

Often, one needs to put such type there because the trait somehow produces
that type. And there's one thing in Rust with superpowers that actually *has*
the ability to have anonymous associated type ‒ the `Fn` (and friends). We are
going to abuse that. How? Through blanket implementations, like this:

```rust
use std::fmt::Debug;

pub trait ProduceStuff {
    type Product: Debug;
    fn produce_stuff(&self, how_much: usize) -> Self::Product;
}

struct ProduceFn<F>(F);

impl<F, P> ProduceStuff for ProduceFn<F>
where
    F: Fn(usize) -> P, // Here is where we steal the associated type
    P: Debug,
{
    type Product = P;
    fn produce_stuff(&self, how_much: usize) -> P {
        (self.0)(how_much)
    }
}

pub fn make_producer() -> impl ProduceStuff {
    ProduceFn(|how_much| unimplemented!())
}
```

You can get this very far… probably as far as your stomach for trait bound
length and ugly error messages can keep up.

## HRTB and Associated Types

Now, this one is the ugly abomination on which rustc's brain in stable explodes.

Let's say we have some lifetime-parametric traits, like this:

```rust
trait Extractor<'a, Source: 'a> {
    type Fragment: 'a;
    fn extract(&self, source: &'a Source) -> Self::Fragment;
}

trait Cruncher<Input> {
    type Report;
    fn crunch(&self, fragment: Input) -> Report;
}
```

We would like to feed the `Extractor` some big data type, get smaller one out
and crunch the data. Of course, we would like to borrow the data on the way, so
`Fragment` will be something containing reference or references ‒ but maybe not
just `&Vec<_>`, maybe something like `(&PartA, &PartB)` (so we can't just type
`-> &Self::Fragment`). We want the `Report` at the end to be an owned type (eg.
`'static`, no references there).

And now, we would like to build a *pipeline* ‒ something that every time it is
fed with the big data, it produces a report. This, obviously, needs to work with
*all* possible lifetimes of the data we feed it, so it calls for the
[`HRTB`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/hrtb.html) thing.

```rust
where
    E: for<'a> Extractor<'a, Source>,
    C: for<'a> Cruncher<E as Extractor<'a, Source>::Fragment>,
```

This has one downside, though: we just asked for an *infinite number* of
`Extractor` and `Cruncher` trait bounds. Each one has a (potentially) different
associated type ‒ `Extractor<'a, T>::Fragment` is some other type than
`Extractor<'b, T>::Fragment`. So, what is the `Report` type we want to
eventually return? Well, because these types on the way differ only in lifetimes
and the `Report` is owned, then there can be just one that is common for all the
traits. *We* know that. But *Rust* doesn't. So it complains that it can't pick
one of these infinitely many types if we ask for it.

There's a way out. First, we need to get hands on *arbitrary one* of these
infinitely many but as we know equivalent types. We do that by providing the
type equations above with a concrete lifetime ‒ and there's only one concrete
lifetime we have, that's `'static`. So, the return type will be:

```rust
-> Cruncher<E as Extractor<'static, Source>>::Fragment>::Report
```

However, if we try to write the body of such function, we'll be using a
*different* lifetime and the resulting `Report` *might* (in theory) be a
different type. So, how do we tell the compiler to accept only types where the
`Report` happens to be the same for all the other lifetimes? Well, just by
translating this sentence to Rust. Literally:

```rust
where
    ...
    C: for<'a> Cruncher<
        E as Extractor<'a, Source>::Fragment,
        // Here we add infinitely many type-equality constrains on associated
        // types of similar-but-not-the-same traits.
        Report = Cruncher<E as Extractor<'static, Source>::Fragment>::Report
    >,
```

I'm not sure I *should* be doing this, though. The stable compiler is able to
resolve this only in case the `Fragment` is also owned type (it fully  works
with beta and newer). I've seen two different compiler crashes (both are
reported, one is already fixed) on the way when debugging it. When something
doesn't line up in the types (well, my actual use case has a few *extra* trait
bounds), it complains a trait bound is not satisfied, but it is missing the
additional information needed to actually track down *what* doesn't line up
(which is worked around by provided a companion function that does nothing at
all and has a smaller subset of the bounds, so one can ask for a better error
message).

## Are there other hacks?

I'm pretty sure there are and that people have their favorites. I'll be happy to
see them shared too, both because one might need them, but also because they are
interesting. Or as horror stories for campfire.
