# Choosing an electric vehicle

I've ordered a BEV (Battery Electric Vehicle), Hyundai Kona with 39kWh battery
(that's the smaller one). EVs are still not considered „proper“ cars by many, at
least here in Czech republic (actually, there's even a lot of anti-EV propaganda
in the media, probably because a large part of the media is owned by people who
also own petrol stations and similar). A lot of not entirely accurate (or
outright lies) information about EVs circulates here.

In the expectation I'll have to explain my sanity in relation to that decision,
I've written down few notes here. Why buying a car in the first place, why it
should be an EV and why specifically this one.

## Preliminaries

I'm going to talk about prices in CZK. For reference, these days one USD is
about 20 CZK. Nevertheless, the wages here are also lower than in US (using
direct currency conversion) or let's say Germany. Therefore, what seems like
cheap for some folks out there doesn't necessarily have to be considered cheap
here. Furthermore, there are no tax deductions for buying an ecological car and
incentives here are mostly just symbolic ‒ like not having to buy a highway
permit (which costs 1500 CZK per year), or cheaper city parking.

Additionally, cars here in Czech republic are not exchanged as often as in maybe
US. The average age of a registered car is 15 years (which means that for every
new car, there's one that's 30 years old). That's in part due to the above wage
difference. In part, a car here becomes member of the family with similar status
and emotional attachment as a pet and one doesn't want to let it go or let it
die. And there's a long tradition of fixing stuff instead of throwing it away.

Also, I fully admit that choosing any kind of product ‒ including a car ‒ is in
large part done by emotions, feelings and impressions. Liking the car is as
important as making sure it makes sense in the given context. I won't go into
much details for the „feels right“, as it's very personal. Let's stick to the
easy to describe „check boxes“.

## Why buying a car

The first thing is, do I (or we, as a family) need a new car? We already have
one, an 11 year old Peugeot 308 SW. It's not outright *bad*, but it's starting
to show its age, visits the service somewhat more often lately.

And we are planning to move from Prague to a small village near Mladá Boleslav.
There's not much public transport, each of us may need to visit Prague (60-70km
away) something like once a week and even shopping will have to happen by a car
in Mladá Boleslav.

Having just one, somewhat aging and unreliable car for all that, with a baby
that might need an unscheduled visit to a doctor and the car being away with the
other parent, seemed like suboptimal solution. In addition to that, I'd like to
start a software [consulting] business in a bit larger scale that now and
visiting clients (in Prague and elsewhere) might introduce yet more traveling.

Therefore, it was time to start looking ‒ especially because the lead times of
ordering a car are really long these days.

## Why an EV

This wasn't an upfront decision. For me, EVs were somewhat interesting thing of
the future. They felt slightly less awkward than ICE (Internal Combustion
Engine) cars and I wanted to have one *eventually*. This might be in part in
somewhat more ecological feel of them (I'll leave discussing if that really is
the case for the Internet, not here). But large part is the comfort of charging
it at home without having to visit some petrol station, possibly better driving
experience (folks on the Internet seem to agree on that one), but mostly, it's a
nice technological toy that feels more elegant than the heaps and heaps of
workarounds stacked onto each other of the ICE.

But I didn't know I wanted one *right now*. After all, if it was just a toy, it
would be really an expensive one.

We started looking and trying cars out. As it quickly turned out, the mass
consumer segment cars have gotten significantly downgraded over the years in
terms of available engines. The usual option is something like 1-litre 3
cylinder turbo petrol mild hybrid *something*. Even though it has higher
kilowatt rating than what we have now, it just doesn't feel capable of
real-world driving.

Now, I don't need a racing car with 0-100 km/h in 3 seconds. But sometimes, when
joining a highway, I might need to squeeze into a traffic and have only the
joining lane to accelerate to the speed of that traffic. Or need to overtake a
truck. Or something. If I flatten the gas pedal at 3rd gear at 50km/h, want to
accelerate to 80 and *nothing happens for 5 seconds* (besides the car suggesting
shifting to 5th gear to save fuel!), that's just outright not a safe car to
drive in traffic (not even speaking about comfort).

The fact the 11 year old car drives better when it's malfunctioning and using
just 3 cylinders of its 4 (that was one of the reasons for the service visits)
than a brand-new fully functional cars is quite telling. And the current car
even has lower consumption (real world one, not talking about what the
manufacturer says) than what we've tested (and we tried several cars) is another
point to the whole picture.

Of course, we could try out some of the „sport“ versions of the cars. But that
increases both the consumption and the price. Playing a bit with the available
configurations, selecting the sport variant, giving it a decent engine and few
of the packages (nothing crazy ‒ heated seats, parking camera, basic set of
assistants), the price just kept on growing. And it grew to a place where it was
more than comparable to a price of a cheaper (new) EV. As it turns out, EVs in
their „basic“ configuration often have similar equipment level as almost full
configuration of an ICE (for some unclear marketing reasons of the
manufacturers).

So we tried one too (if for no other reason, we were curious how it drives, when
people keep praising it). And sure enough, it is much more convenient to drive
(no gear shifting ‒ not even automatic one, very smooth and immediately
available power and *very* agile).

## Why Kona

Apart from the „feels right“ feeling, there are some very rational reasons why
we chose that one.

First, its lead time is reasonable ‒ only 4 months. Some other cars (EVs and
ICEs) have over a year right now.

Then there's price. If we skip anything that doesn't fit at least 4 people
(so a family could travel in it) or is afraid of highways (max speed of 90km/h
or so), there are some 3 models in about the same price category. That's Hyundai
Kona, Nissan Leaf and Renault Zoe (all considered in their lower
configurations). All of them are in around 800 000 CZK (most importantly, below
somewhat psychological 1 million). There are some others, but they seem to be
mostly very close technological siblings.

Nissan fails badly on the charging front (it only offers 1-phase charger, which
doesn't go well with our future plans of having photovoltaic on the house and
offers the ChaDeMo fast charging connector, which is dying out in Europe ‒ it's
fine now, but might not be in 10 years).

I've found some bad reports about Zoe's crash safety, compared to the other two
(though it seems all three are better than most of the stuff on the roads
around).

Kona has the further advantage of having an active thermal management of the
battery. That means it will likely degrade slower and is capable of multiple
fast charging sessions in a row interleaved by highway driving. Without the
active management, the first charging is fast, but heats the battery and it
takes a long time to cool down. In other words, the fast charging capability of
Leaf and Zoe effectively only mostly doubles its range, but Kona extends it for
as long as the driver is willing to hop the chargers.

Furthermore, Kona is being manufactured in Czech republic, has a good selection
of non-premium colors and the Hyundai dealer seemed the most
knowledgeable/enthusiastic about EVs.

All in all, while the Kona doesn't excel in many things (it has really good
consumption and that's about it), it is at least outstanding and OK in quite
every parameter. And it has this feeling that it's simply a car, nothing more,
nothing less (while owning a Tesla feels like some kind of declaration of
something and Ionic 5 is this alien-looking tea serving room on wheels).

## Why not a used Tesla

I've discussed the options with several friends and a quite common
recommendation was to buy a used Tesla. There were enough reasons for us not to.

First, we wanted a new car, not used one. That's possibly not _fully_ rational,
but, well… And a new Tesla (Model 3 Standard Range) starts at some 1.3 million.
For that price, the selection is much wider. While there probably isn't a single
car to beat Model 3 in all parameters, many beat it at least some. If you're
looking for an EV (or any car) and have such budget for it, it's worth looking
at the alternatives ‒ Hyundai Ionic 5, Hyundai Kona in the higher configuration,
Kia EV 6, ID.3, ID.4, Škona Enyaq… and I've probably forgot some (but I *was*
looking at these, even though I didn't want to spend as much ‒ maybe as the next
car in few years).

Nevertheless, even ignoring these reasons, as there's a lot about Kona that
feels right to me, there's a lot about Tesla that feels *very wrong*. It's not
like anything of the below would in isolation be a problem, but it draws a
general bigger picture. And yes, it is *personal*. It feels somewhat similar to
the Apple products ‒ some people are almost zealots about it and for some it
doesn't even enter the list of products to consider.

* General tendency to over-promise and under-deliver.
* High service costs when something happens and limited options of service out
  of Tesla network. Reportedly, things don't break on Teslas, but it doesn't
  have to be the car's fault. I've ripped off half of the front mask on a stone
  sticking out of grass in a „parking lot“. The fix was few hundred CZK and took
  2 days (sure, non-original parts).
* Tendency to replace half the car when something small happens, charge the
  customer for the whole half and then disassemble the parts later on in the
  factory.
* Feeling that the car is not really mine, as Tesla can decide to deactivate it
  remotely, track it, etc, etc.
* Not enough physical buttons in the car.
* Tendency to force the user to the „Proper way“ (like telling me which charger
  I should use for how long instead of letting me decide), instead of giving the
  user the freedom to choose their own mistakes to make.

## Could we afford it?

After that experience of trying it out, we started to discuss if we can afford
it. And I don't mean only price (that's easy enough to check), but according to
other parameters. We did rule out the pricier options ‒ we probably *could*
afford it, but didn't feel like spending that much on a car. At least, not right
now.

So, pros and cons of the Kona. Pros are already listed above.

On one side we really liked that car we tried out (it was the bigger-battery
Kona, we eventually ordered the smaller-battery one; I know the difference is
not just in the range, but also in the available power, but the car felt
somewhat *too* powerful anyway).

On the other, there's the list of potential issues related to EVs. Some of them
are solved and not relevant any more (while they *might* have been with older
models), some are addressed on non-technical level (if statistics about battery
long-term degradation isn't enough, there are really good warranties about them
‒ the manufacturer bets their own money on the battery living long) and some
were outright lies from the very beginning.

There were two left. Cargo space and range. Note that both of these are to some
extent solved by some of the more pricey models listed above (EV6 is good on
both, Ionic 5 or Enyaq is outstanding on both, Kona with the large battery is
great with the range, as is Model 3 for those that consider it).

### Cargo space

Kona is a small car (but I already consider it a *proper* car as size goes, not
like a Smart For Two or similar kind of shopping bag on wheels ‒ I mean, these
are fine for some use cases, but you don't put the whole family in them even if
you try hard enough). Most of the time it is an *advantage*. I'm not
particularly good at parking or squeezing through spaces.

Nevertheless, if you open the trunk and look inside it, you start to wonder if
you can squeeze in *a briefcase*. Now, that's in part optics and its a bit
better than it looks like, but it's not great.

We did try squeezing a baby pram in there (and succeeded, though with little bit
of a tetris game).

However, there are few more options.

The trunk has a double bottom (well, technically a *triple* one). You can put
stuff under the floor of it, or just take the floor out and enjoy few more
litres of space. And you can take another filling foam organizer for stuff out
of the depression that would have held a reserve wheel if the car had one and
enjoy *even more* (though weirdly shaped) space. This gets Kona from „Is there a
trunk at all?“ category to something about average.

Hyundai decided not to take advantage of the empty space in the front where an
ICE is for the other flavors of Kona (Kona exists in both ICE and EV versions,
but unlike some other cars that were ICE cars retro-fitted with batteries, they
at least designed it from the start to hold both; it's still not as good as a
platform designed specifically for an EV). But the space is there and people on
the Internet share guides how to built a DIY „frunk“ (cargo space for the empty
area there). I'm not sure if I'll go into that, but it could hold all the wheel
repair kits and reserve lights that one has an obligation to carry around and
nearly never uses.

And then there's the option of putting a roof box on top of the car. Hyundai
probably suspects the car doesn't have much cargo space and offers one in a good
discount to Kona, so we accepted this offer. When we need extra space (which is
seldom), we can put it on and have a nice, small car the rest of the time.

### Range

Range is usually the first question of curious people (as in, „Will it be able
to get from that village to Prague?“). The reality is, the range is *much
better* than most people tend to believe. There were times when the EVs didn't
have much range ‒ the first generation of Nissan Leaf had claimed range of some
120 km. That's not much, but it was still usable in some use cases.

This smaller-battery Kona claims a range of 305 km. I've also checked a lot of
real-world tests, reviews, „races“ across Europe to see this number is not made
up marketing but somewhat realistic. That range obviously depends on many things
(and EVs in general are more „sensitive“ to things like bad weather or driving
style). But even when counting in a 20% battery degradation (that's what the
warranty guarantees after 8 years, statistics suggest even smaller one), bad
weather, not charging to 100% and some safety margin, it should still be able to
get to Prague *and back* quite comfortably.

Getting to Prague and back (and to Mladá Boleslav, but that's closer) will be
what the car will be doing most of the time. From that point of view, the range
is OK.

But maybe we would like to drive somewhere further away, from time to time. So
I've done some more research.

I've went through the places we've been to by car previously (the ones I
remembered), assumed I'd charge to 100% before a longer trip and tried to
calculate/guess if it would be possible to go there and back on a charge, single
way or there would be a need to charge on the way.

It turns out, the journeys that would not make it there and back usually
included at least an overnight stay, so some kind of slow charging would work.
The need to stop for a charge would have happened about 30 times during the 6
years we own the current car (if it were that Kona) and we made a stop most of
the times, for a rest, refreshment and similar. About half of the places we
stopped have an usable charger now, during the other half we would have to stop
at a different place. Maybe the stop would have to be slightly longer due to the
charging, but not significantly (Kona doesn't offer that modern „when you return
from the bathroom, you find a charged car when you get back“ charging speed,
only „buy a tea and enjoy drinking it in comfort“ speed). In very few instances,
it would have forced more stops than we've actually made.

Yes, doing this just on very unreliable memory is not very scientific. And yes,
it would involve a minor inconvenience from time to time (possibly twice a
year), but compared to more comfortable charging at home and better driving
experience, it feels like favorable exchange. *None* of the journeys we've done
would be impossible, some of them would have to be slightly better planned or
would add an additional hour to a 8-hour drive.

After this research, it seems an EV is a good option given our driving
patterns. It doesn't have to be for everyone, but note that this is the
smaller-battery version and with charging speed that's no longer considered top
of the line.

And yes, we are still keeping the old car. As a backup, in case the above
calculations were terribly wrong somehow ([Better Route
Planner][betterrouteplanner] seems to insist on giving me way more charging
stops ‒ but it seems to be a common pattern for everyone doing a review of the
Kona, that the computed consumption is almost double compared to real-world
driving and therefore the number of stops is almost double of what's needed in
practice) and in case we need to haul some big cargo. Or, if we need to haul
some *dirty* cargo, like construction material. After all, we are going to move
into a newly built house, with the garden not yet finished.

## In conclusion

The car haven't arrived yet, but we are eagerly waiting for it, hoping it'll
work out great. Given our plans, driving patterns and budget, it seems good a
reasonable compromise (considering all the cars on the market, not just EVs).

Is that a car for everyone? No, of course not. There are limitations to it and
the effect to which they annoy one very much depends on the situation. Some of
them are solved by other EVs (though they might be pricier), in some cases EV
doesn't make sense (at least not now).

Would I be buying this car had I have more money? Probably not, the price does
play a role. But the bigger-battery Kona would be pretty high on the list to
consider. I simply like the car and reviewers agree that it's good car for even
long-distance travel, as it compensates its slower charging speeds (comparing to
today's best) by very low consumption (for some unknown marketing reason, the
manufacturers/dealers almost always lend the highest-configuration version of
each car to the reviewers, I don't know what they'd have to say about the
smaller-battery variant).

I won't try persuading you to buy an EV. But if you're looking for a car, I'll
be as bold as to suggest you at least *consider* and have a look at what's on
the market.

[consulting]: /services.html
[betterrouteplanner]: https://abetterrouteplanner.com/
