# Some useful details about using the Kona EV

Almost a year ago, I've bought a Hyundai Kona EV. You can read a bit about the
[selection process] in that old blog post.

Finally, I've found some time to write down a bit of experience with the car
(having a kid and building a house are big time sinks). In this post, I'm going
to describe few observations about how the car works. These can be used by
anyone with this car (and probably similar cars) as kind of extra tips.

I hope to write few more posts about it soon, probably something about its range
/ consumption / charging and something about general impressions.

The car in question is 2022 Kona EV with the smaller battery (39.2kWh) and the
lowest trim (called Smart in Czech republic), with the only addition of a heat
pump and three-phase 11kW onboard charger. I have it in that bright blue color.

## Storage space

On the first glance, the trunk space is tiny. Nevertheless, the car has a
removable floor of the trunk. There are some Styrofoam boxes below it which are
completely useless. If these are taken out, the floor can be moved one level
lower, which adds more space to the main trunk and still leaves a spare-wheel
well (but no spare wheel in it) under there to keep all the manuals, cables and
warning triangles. Or, when really pressed for space, I've left the floor at
home at occasion completely. The top cover of the trunk is also removable.

I'd estimate that all this about doubles the amount of trunk space. The shape is
a bit awkward, but the access to it is good enough (it's easier to fit backpacks
than suitcases there).

Otherwise, the floor has harness hooks to fix things onto. The car came with a
net, two tethers and a foldable box with a Velcro on the bottom that attaches to
the floor. These are all small enough to carry around at all times and come
handy from time to time.

As more storage space goes, the car came with a spacious roof box (which raises
the consumption on a highway somewhat, so together with the small battery isn't
the best thing for long journeys).

Officially, the car doesn't have a frunk (or front trunk), but there's a big
plastic decoration under the hood. Some people have taken it out and replaced it
with an Ikea box. Alternatively, the lower Styrofoam box that was sitting in the
spare-wheel well fits perfectly. This creates a bit of usable space there,
but AFAIK is not endorsed by the manufacturer, mostly because possible heat
coming from the equipment hosted below it (I believe the box directly below it
is either the AC charger or the inverter).

### Transporting long objects

I've been able to transport various thin but long objects with the car (see the
note about building a house).

* A bit over 1m fits horizontally into the trunk. There are "pockets" near the
  entrance to the trunk, which make it a bit wider there.
* Something about 1.4m fits into the footwell in front of the back seats. This
  includes the horizontal bars for the roof box.
* Something about 1.8m fits into the cabin along the right side doors. It can be
  loaded through the trunk door. I assume it would be possible to fit these on
  the left side of the car in the same way, but that probably could bother the
  driver, while the passenger (if present) is free to deal with the cargo if it
  moves (but it seems to fit smugly and doesn't tend to move).
* A bit over 2m fits through the middle of the car, if the back seat is folded.
  This is a bit awkward, as it is close to the drive direction selection buttons
  and I'd really recommend securing this cargo properly ‒ unlike the previous
  options, this doesn't hold in place on its own without tying it down.
* Tying longer objects to the top of the car, using the horizontal bars of the
  roofbox (that's why I know they fit _into_ the car when needed ‒ as I didn't
  want to have them on the car while getting to the pickup location, as they
  also raise consumption somewhat and make noise while driving on the highway).
  It's even legal to transport something that's longer than the car itself, but
  the ends must be marked properly in such case.

Anyway, if I was to transport skis to some place where they can be used, I'd
probably opt for using the roof box. Having them inside the car for longer
trip (as opposed to just bringing few pipes from the closest store to a
construction site) would be awkward and the roof box is reportedly more
aerodynamic than just skis tied to the top of the car.

### The possibilities

As noted above, the car, while giving an impression of a small one (and being on
somewhat smaller size on the outside, so it's OK to get through cities and park
in underground garages), can transport a lot with a bit of cargo tetris game
when loading.

On one occasion, it transported 3 adults, a child in a child seat (have you
noticed that a child seat takes more space than an adult occupant?), a pram,
a child chair, luggage for all these people (including all the child-care
equipment like spare clothes, diapers, … again, a child needs more luggage than
an adult) and a bicycle. All of that inside of the car, without the roof box
(that one was delayed on delivery).

Four adults and a child is also a possibility (though these had much less
luggage, so there was no need for the tetris game that time).

However, getting two child prams into it would probably pose a serious problem.

All in all, as space goes, it can definitely work as a family car, but might
impose some limitations when packing for a holiday, one can't just take
everything just in case.

To me it feels like a good compromise between a car that doesn't feel huge in
city streets while making it possible to load a family and reasonable amount of
cargo for a holiday trip with little bit of care when packing. There's enough
space for the crew in the cabin not to feel cramped, but isn't luxuriously
wasteful.

## Little features & quirks

### Android Auto

The car (in this trim) doesn't have a built-in navigation, but the screen can
show navigation from a mobile phone. The easiest way to pair a phone to it is by
connecting it by an USB cable. Nevertheless, once the phone is paired by the
cable, it can be connected wirelessly (it might be possible to pair a phone in
other ways, but I haven't tried).

If multiple people share the car and both are present, it sometimes
automatically connect to the wrong phone. It is possible to switch (even
mid-drive), but the menu for disconnecting the wrong one and connecting the
right one is hidden somewhere deep in the menu tree (if no phone is connected,
it is easily accessible, but once it is connected, the same button leads to the
connected phone).

### Preheat options

Preheating a car before departure ‒ that is, before even approaching the car,
during winter, is a very nice feature. This is possible for EVs because they
have separate heater (some ICE cars have this too, but it is rather rare ‒ EVs
don't have enough waste heat, so they _need_ to have a dedicated heater).

One can then just walk to a warm car with the snow or ice on it melted enough to
be just brushed off instead of having to spend minutes scratching it off. Then
just enter the warm car and go.

This trim doesn't offer a mobile application to start the preheating (higher
trims do), but there are two additional ways to start it.

One is by setting a schedule beforehand. This one works only when the car is
connected to the charging cable at the time, but has the advantage of not
draining the battery, it takes the power directly from the charger.

The other one is through the buttons on the key. It has decent range ‒ it's
possible to use this from a block house window at 8th floor when the car is
parked somewhere in front of the house. The preheating is fast enough to be warm
before getting from the 8th floor down to the car.

To use this thing, one has to first press the lock button (even if the car is
already locked), followed by holding the „rotate“ button for 3 seconds (a button
with a circular arrow on it, the only one that doesn't have its meaning obvious
just from the icon). This _doesn't_ work when the car is connected to the
charger, which I find annoying.

### Charge port locking

The charging cable locks when charging, both for electric safety and to avoid
someone stealing it. There are two modes for AC (in DC it always uses the first
mode), in one it unlocks after finishing the charge, the other one holds the
cable until the whole car is unlocked.

Many AC stations don't have their own cable, so own cable is needed (one is
supplied with the car). As the AC station also unlocks it after charging is
done, it is better to use the latter mode. In that case the cable would be held
locked at least to the car and nobody can just carry it away.

Whenever the car is unlocked, the cable is unlocked for about 15 seconds (the
charging is paused for this duration). This allows to terminate the charging
session prematurely or unplug the cable before leaving. If you don't unplug
within these 15 seconds, the cable locks again. You can press the unlock button
on the key again (even if already unlocked) and it'll unlock it for another 15
seconds.

Occasionally, the car gets confused and forgets to unlock the cable. While
there's a mechanical emergency release puller under the hood, it's not needed in
such case. Simply playing with locking / unlocking / switching the mode a bit
resets the car into sane state and it eventually unlocks.

### Fog lights

For some unknown reason, the fog lights can't be turned on when lights are on
the automatic. If they are needed, the lights need to be switch to the „always
on“ position first.

### The Lane Follow Assistant

The car has two independent steering assistants. One of them (the LKA, Lane Keep
Assistant) is enabled by default. It's the one that first beeps when drifting
close to the line, then it „bounces“ off it back into the line if the driver
doesn't react. The bounce is more of a nudge to the wheel than forcefully taking
over ‒ if you want to drift over the line and hold the wheel firmly, the car
won't fight that, but if you don't pay attention or even don't hold the wheel,
it'd prevent falling off the road.

The other one, LFA, Lane Follow Assistant needs to be enabled (by a button on
the steering wheel) and tries to smoothly keep the car in the middle of the
lane. It's gradual, the more off-center the car is, the more force is applied
towards the center. In this mode, the LKA almost never bounces (only beeps),
since to drift over the line, enough force is already being applied by the
driver to the wheel.

Also, a turn signal temporarily pauses both of these assistants, but it doesn't
disable them. Switching lanes need to be done manually, but once the car is
safely within the other lane, they seamlessly reengage.

I've found the assistant very convenient (though my wife doesn't use it, she
says it interferes with her driving), reliable and predictable. It doesn't try
to fight me, but helps to guide the car through curves smoothly and makes it
possible to check the mirrors or take a sip of a drink with one hand without
drifting to the side.

It never did anything crazy and it is easy to guess places where it might give
up ‒ in which case the force on the wheel simply disappears when the car is
feeling my hands on the wheel, but would beep if it was unsure. Actually, it
often can handle places which I'd expect it not to ‒ it knows to prefer yellow
„construction“ lines, sometimes can recognize a pavement or series of traffic
cones, is willing to go with a line on only one line for a short while. It can
work in adverse weather conditions (heavy rain combined with fog in night ‒
reduced visibility and a lot of reflections).

The car has no dedicated sensors to recognize the driver holding the wheel.
Therefore, it does so by registering steering moves of the driver. If I hold the
wheel but keep driving in sync (or just let it drive with hands on the wheel),
it doesn't „feel“ the hands on the wheel and would occasionally remind to keep
the hands there. It's enough to just wiggle the wheel a tiny bit in such case.

### Other assistants

There's also an emergency braking assistant. That one is slightly more nervous
than I'd like. In case a car starts braking in front of me and I start braking
too, but use up a bit of the safety distance so I can brake more smoothly, it
would start beeping at me even thought I know I'm braking enough. Nevertheless,
it has never started „out of the blue“, it was always clear what it is being
scared of and it has never actually reached the second phase where it would
start braking all by itself. So it may be a bit on the overcautious side, but
I keep it enabled.

I've turned off the rear-occupant alert thing. That one felt quite useless and
annoying. It would remind to check if someone is sitting in the back seats. But
as it only checked that the rear door were open previously, it would mostly just
pop up every time no matter if there was one or the rear occupants were adults
exiting all by themselves.

### Auto-hold

This thing can be enabled by a button on the middle console. Then, if the car
stops, it stays with engaged breaks and won't move until the driver presses the
accelerator pedal.

Without auto-hold, the car would start creeping forward if no pedal is pressed
(I've heard this is emulation of how automatic gearboxes work).

I'd recommend _not_ using the auto-hold at least at these situations:

* Pull-through car wash (they need the car not to brake for any reason).
* Maneuvering in tight places. One needs to press the accelerator to start
  moving, which disengages the brakes suddenly and the car „jumps“ forward a
  bit. On the other hand, slowly lifting the brake pedal without auto-hold lets
  the car start creeping in much smoother and arbitrarily slow way, allowing to
  move just a tiny distance without crashing into obstacles.

## Regen

The car can slow down using the motor instead of the brakes, generate energy by
that and store it back into the battery.

### Paddles and regen control

One can slow down by lifting the foot off the accelerator (or lifting it
partially, to slow down less). The paddles under the steering wheel allow
adjusting how much it slows down, from coasting at level 0 to strong braking at
level 3. I personally use 3 in cities and slower traffic, 2 on highways and long
stretches of roads with steady-going traffic.

Another feature is _holding_ the left paddle. During the hold, the car will
brake even more strongly and would come to a complete stop in a very smooth way
(if held for long enough). Then it'll activate a one-time auto-hold ‒ it'll stay
stopped after lifting the foot off the pedals and letting go of the paddle, but
next time the car would act according to the previous auto-hold setting.

This is very convenient for stopping on traffic lights ‒ the stop is comfortable
and smooth and the driver can take a short rest of the foot. Also, this
activates a notification that the car in front starts moving, so if I stop
paying attention while standing still, the car would remind me before someone
behind me loses patience and uses the horn. This works for cars only, not
traffic lights switching from red to green.

It's possible to use the left paddle hold even when already stopped (by a brake
pedal), which will still activate the one-time auto-hold. This is handy in a
traffic jam that gradually slows down into a complete stop and then feels like
it'll take a while to start moving.

### Behind the scenes

This is mostly out of nerd interest and has no direct effect on driving, but
can be observed in the screen with the energy use report (regen shows as a
negative number on the drive unit).

Even using the brake pedal engages the regenerative braking before using the
friction brakes. Even the level 3 / the left paddle isn't the maximum braking
force the motor can exert, and if there's a need to slow down more by the brake
pedal, the car will take as much energy into the battery as it can.

The maximum regeneration power is the same as the acceleration power of the
motor ‒ 100kW. From what I've heard, this is the case even for other Hyundai
electric cars ‒ if it can do 150kW of acceleration (like the bigger-battery
version of Kona), 150kW would also be the regen limit.

I believe this behaviour is part of why Hyundai is able to get really good
consumption results. It is also of note that not even Tesla is this aggressive
in regaining the energy ‒ their regen limit is lower than the acceleration limit
and they don't regen more on brake pedal, only by lifting the foot off the
accelerator.

Some older EVs (or even older models of Kona) had a problem of not using the
friction brakes enough ‒ they would use regen so much that the friction brakes
would rust and would have to be replaced prematurely. I don't have it confirmed
officially, but I think this car is clever enough to sometimes prefer the
friction brakes to keep the brake pads clean ‒ at least, after almost a year of
driving, the brake pads are nicely clean and not rusty at all.

## Driving comfort

I'm probably going to dedicate a more detailed post to this, but in short, the
car is very nice to drive.

It's far from a sports car. I would, however, describe it as agile. While it has
„only“ 100kW of power, these 100kW are always at immediate disposition, no need
to worry about current RPM, drive gear, turbo compressors, down-shifting, etc.
Just a smooth pull all the way from 0 to maximum speed. This consistency makes
it easy to change speeds when merging into traffic or switching between highway
lanes of different speeds. There's enough power to do all these maneuvers while
fully loaded and going uphill.

## Consumption, range and charging

Again, this topic probably deserves a separate post and here is only a very
short version.

The car has rather small battery and somewhat slow DC charging. It compensates
these to some extent by having low consumption.

It gets somewhere between 200-400km on a full charge, depending on many factors
(amount of highway driving, weather, winter/summer tires, …).

All in all, it makes for a perfect commuter and errand car.

It is reasonably good for these shorter family trips ‒ going to a ZOO and back,
one doesn't want to spend several hours on the road to get there and back if the
visit is going to also take only few hours.

The car has active battery cooling, so it's capable of arbitrary number of DC
charging sessions in a row. That makes it _possible_ to take it for a 1000km
long trip. Nevertheless, with this battery size and charging speed, one has to
stop every 150-180km for 30-40 minutes and that makes it somewhat uncomfortable.
It's probably OK for one holiday a year, but not on regular basis.

On the other hand, if the destination is closer than about 1.5 of range, the
charging doesn't involve particular discomfort ‒ at such trip, taking a single
15-20 minute stop is something people often do anyway.

## Overall impressions

I'd say that as EVs go, this one is somewhere on the low end of what might work
as an all-around (and only) family car. Such use would involve some compromises
here and there.

It can definitely work as the kind of „second family car“, but one that'll
likely do most of the everyday driving due to the comfort, ease of use.

If I was choosing a car now, I'd still probably go with this car. I *might*
consider a higher trim (one that has the bigger battery and adaptive cruise
control) ‒ these would eliminate the biggest compromise with long trips and, by
the ability to actually use the roof box on long trips, the compromise in
storage space.

On the other hand, I would probably not recommend the small battery version for
people that do long trips often (the bigger battery should work fine there). In
either case, I'd recommend going over driving habits to see how often you do a
drive that's longer than some 150 or 200km in one go.

[selection process]: {% post_url 2022-05-06-choosing-ev %}
